README.md, before:

A scribus project manager
=========================

Scribus project management tools with shell scripts.

**Scribus doesnt provide any project management tools. These shell scripts mainly aims to compensate this.**

## What is a Scribus project
A scribus project is a book or a magazine made out of multiple scribus files.
Each scribus file is a chapter, an article, a part of the book.
All have to be concatenated to create the whole book.
All share some common properties like size of pages, styles or color profiles, but some of the chapters might have specific properties.

## What does a scribus-project-manager *manage* ?
A Scribus project manager is a tool that help manage multiple scribus files that are parts of a same project.

Particularly it helps
* check scribus produced files and PDFs before sending them to the printer.
  - ensure that used fonts are embeded or subset or vectorized
  - ensure that PDF format related constraints are satisfied (PDF version, color profiles, etc)
  - ensure that used images are stored in the local `images` file so the project can be safely saved
  - ensure all page dimensions and properties are conform to some project or chapter related settings
  - ensure that page numbers follow each other depending on the page number in each chapter
  - ensure PDF is updated when sla has been edited
  - ensure backups are created before altering files
* edit SLAs so they conform to the project standard or to the chapter specifics.
* produce the concatenated updated PDF.

Some day, it could help clean styles and share styles or objects accross files (compensate for scribus bugs with styles).

## What is this repository

This repo contains the scripts I use to create the quaterly [Passerelle Eco](http://www.passerelleco.info/) magazine. This magazine is made of 8 to 20 parts with same page size, sharing lots of common styles, but some parts being very differents. 
After creating dedicated config files, the scripts can be used for other projects having differents characteristics.

### Main tools

* **slacheck** : 
*   - performs all possible checks and reports issues before sending PDF to printer. 
*   - Optionnaly edit the SLA so it conforms to the defined standard.  
* **slacheckimages** : checks that the used images are all stored in 'images' subfolder.  
* **slacheckfonts** : checks that all used fonts are either embeded or subseted.  

Also :
* **mak book script** : call relevant tools on relevant files and create final PDF (no generic makbook is published yet, but an example makbook file is available).  WARNING : not uptodate but see example with.

### Lower level scripts
* **slacheckattr** : checks the value of some xml attribute in the scribus file
* **slasetattr** : set some XML attr in the SLA file to its correct value
   - various backup are created : .sla.first.sla, .sla.last.sla and a hiden .filename.sla.tmp.bak  
* **strtrim** : basic string trim

### Environnement tools
This project is primarily created and used on Ubuntu 14.04.

It includes the following tools, that might depend on the OS :
* **sla_icon** : adds specific icon on SLA file(s) for nautilus view  
* **clean_icon** : removes user-added icon on file or folder

These scripts can be made callable via nautilus action's menus.

Also :
* **shellcolors** : create variables to easily bring colors to console output using escape sequences

## Configuration data

Configuration is value for **page sizes**, **bleeds**, **marks**, **color profiles** and all other book creation issues etc...

The configuration values are parmeters for slacheck script and can be set
- at global tool level in the slacheck.defaultconfig file
- at project level in the project related local slacheck.config file
- at file level in the file-related local filename.config file

You have to edit the defaultconfig file or create a project config file so as to adapt the values to your project's standard. In case some of the file of your project requires different settings, then you have to create the required file-related restricted settings.

Doing this requires 
- edit a correct SLA that fit your standards, 
- look for all the attributes names and values there 
- and set them as the goal for your project or file in the corresponding config file

So as to check the correct values, just launch the script
So as to set the SLA parameters to the project specified values, use the -set options

## Set of files composing the project ##

The set of files is described in a string made out of all filenames.

3 possible standard organisation of files in the project folder are proposed and make project description more easy :
* 0 : no change to filename in sources
* 1 : nomfich stands for filename/filename(.sla)
* 2 : nomfich stands for filename/PAO/filename(.sla)

Simple example : 
```
# 5 files project
sources="CoverBegin		Inside/Summary  Inside/InsidePages		Ads/Adverts  CoverEnd"
sourcespattern=0
```

Example where all SLA files are stored in filename/filename.sla :
```
sources="CoverBegin		Summary  InsidePages		Adverts  CoverEnd"
sourcespattern=1
```

Example where all SLA files are stored in filename/PAO/filename.sla, so other subfolders exist in filename/ :
```
sources="CoverBegin		Summary  InsidePages		Adverts  CoverEnd"
sourcespattern=2
```
## Page numbering ##

The project can check and set the correct numberging of pages in each file of the project.
2 ways to do so for each file of the project : 
- specify the number of pages of the file, using n_6 (for a 6 pages document)
- specify the starting page number for the file, using p_13 (for a document starting on page 13)

Equivalent examples :
* ```sources="p_1 CoverBegin		p_3 Summary  p_7 InsidePages	p_15	Notes  p_20 CoverEnd"```
* ```sources="n_2 CoverBegin		n_4 Summary  n_8 InsidePages	n_5	Notes  p_20 CoverEnd"```

So as to set the correct numbering, use -set option

## Checking PDF files validity ##

slacheck checks that the previously created PDF are uptodate. 
When the PDF is older than the SLA, then it creates a newer PDF (saving the previously existing one as .bak)
It's possible to avoid this automatic behaviour using -pdfignore or -pdfcheck options :
- -pdfignore : dont check whether pdf exists and dont compare PDF and SLA last edit dates"
- -pdfcheck : check pdf, but dont re-create it in case required"

## Ensuring project sanity and safety ##

slacheck checks that the project has been correctly collected for output : 
it checks that all used images are stored into the local images/ folder

slacheck checks that the fonts are either embeded or subset
An option also exists also to use vectorized versions of the PDFs

## could be done

Next step :
* Create separated config files for the list of files included in the project so as to release a generic makebook script (easy !)
 
Other usefull features :
* import or overwrite some specific style in all parts of the project
* use one of the document as the `masterdocument` and use it for smart synchronization for
   * masterdocuments 
   * styles (optionnaly state which styles should NOT be synced)
* optionnaly state that some attribut should remain unchanged when using -set option

Other not so usefull features :
* smart merge of SLAs (manage styles, masterpages and other conflicts) (usefull since merge of SLA is one of scribus Most Annoying Bug, but complex and not so usefull with this project manager)


## Rules when proposing a script or push request for this repo
* name of the script should be self-understandable and should give hints as what the script does
* you should provide a detailed description of the intent, required conditions and action of the script, as comments at the script's begining
* same for the push requests
* scripts should provide help on how to use them (-h option)

Commit message:

-find and -xmlfind simple doc
+ other details

README.md, after:

A scribus project manager
=========================

Scribus project management tools with shell scripts.

**Scribus doesnt provide any project management tools. These shell scripts mainly aims to compensate this.**

## What is a Scribus project
A scribus project is a book or a magazine made out of multiple scribus files.
Each scribus file is a chapter, an article, a part of the book.
All have to be concatenated to create the whole book.
All share some common properties like size of pages, styles or color profiles, but some of the chapters might have specific properties.

## What does a scribus-project-manager *manage* ?
A Scribus project manager is a tool that help manage multiple scribus files that are parts of a same project.

Particularly it helps
* check scribus produced files and PDFs before sending them to the printer.
  - ensure that used fonts are embeded or subset or vectorized
  - ensure that PDF format related constraints are satisfied (PDF version, color profiles, etc)
  - ensure that used images are stored in the local `images` file so the project can be safely saved
  - ensure all page dimensions and properties are conform to some project or chapter related settings
  - ensure that page numbers follow each other depending on the page number in each chapter
  - ensure PDF is updated when sla has been edited
  - ensure backups are created before altering files
* edit SLAs so they conform to the project standard or to the chapter specifics.
* produce the concatenated updated PDF.

Some day, it could help clean styles and share styles or objects accross files (compensate for scribus bugs with styles).

## What is this repository

This repo contains the scripts I use to create the quaterly [Passerelle Eco](http://www.passerelleco.info/) magazine. This magazine is made of 8 to 20 parts with same page size, sharing lots of common styles, but some parts being very differents. 
After creating dedicated config files, the scripts can be used for other projects having differents characteristics.

### Main tools

* **slacheck** : 
*   - performs all possible checks and reports issues before sending PDF to printer. 
*   - Optionnaly edit the SLA so it conforms to the defined standard.  
* **slacheckimages** : checks that the used images are all stored in 'images' subfolder.  
* **slacheckfonts** : checks that all used fonts are either embeded or subseted.  

Also :
* **mak book script** : call relevant tools on relevant files and create final PDF (no generic makbook is published yet, but an example makbook file is available).  WARNING : not uptodate but see example with.

### Lower level scripts
* **slacheckattr** : checks the value of some xml attribute in the scribus file
* **slasetattr** : set some XML attr in the SLA file to its correct value
   - various backup are created : .sla.first.sla, .sla.last.sla and a hiden .filename.sla.tmp.bak  
* **strtrim** : basic string trim

### Environnement tools
This project is primarily created and used on Ubuntu 14.04.

It includes the following tools, that might depend on the OS :
* **sla_icon** : adds specific icon on SLA file(s) for nautilus view  
* **clean_icon** : removes user-added icon on file or folder

These scripts can be made callable via nautilus action's menus.

Also :
* **shellcolors** : create variables to easily bring colors to console output using escape sequences

## Configuration data

Configuration is value for **page sizes**, **bleeds**, **marks**, **color profiles** and all other book creation issues etc...

The configuration values are parmeters for slacheck script and can be set
- at global tool level in the slacheck.defaultconfig file
- at project level in the project related local slacheck.config file
- at file level in the file-related local filename.config file

You have to edit the defaultconfig file or create a project config file so as to adapt the values to your project's standard. In case some of the file of your project requires different settings, then you have to create the required file-related restricted settings.

Doing this requires 
- edit a correct SLA that fit your standards, 
- look for all the attributes names and values there 
- and set them as the goal for your project or file in the corresponding config file

So as to check the correct values, just launch the script
So as to set the SLA parameters to the project specified values, use the -set options

## Set of files composing the project ##

The set of files is described in a string made out of all filenames.

3 possible standard organisation of files in the project folder are proposed and make project description more easy :
* 0 : no change to filename in sources
* 1 : nomfich stands for filename/filename(.sla)
* 2 : nomfich stands for filename/PAO/filename(.sla)

Simple example : 
```
# 5 files project, no sourcing pattern
sources="CoverBegin		Inside/Summary  Inside/InsidePages		Ads/Adverts  CoverEnd"
sourcespattern=0
```

Example where all SLA files are stored in filename/filename.sla :
```
# 5 files project, basic sourcing pattern where the chapter SLA are each at the root of their chapter folder
sources="CoverBegin		Summary  InsidePages		Adverts  CoverEnd"
sourcespattern=1
```

Example where all SLA files are stored in filename/PAO/filename.sla, so other subfolders exist in filename/ :
```
# more complex store pattern where SLA files are in PAO subfolder of each chapter folder
sources="CoverBegin		Summary  InsidePages		Adverts  CoverEnd"
sourcespattern=2
```
## Page numbering ##

The project can check and set the correct numberging of pages in each file of the project.
2 ways to do so for each file of the project : 
- specify the number of pages of the file, using n_6 (for a 6 pages document)
- specify the starting page number for the file, using p_13 (for a document starting on page 13)

Equivalent examples :
* ```sources="p_1 CoverBegin		p_3 Summary  p_7 InsidePages	p_15	Notes  p_20 CoverEnd"```
* ```sources="n_2 CoverBegin		n_4 Summary  n_8 InsidePages	n_5	Notes  p_20 CoverEnd"```

So as to set the correct numbering, use -set option

## Checking PDF files validity ##

slacheck checks that the previously created PDF are uptodate. 
When the PDF is older than the SLA, then it creates a newer PDF (saving the previously existing one as .bak)
It's possible to avoid this automatic behaviour using -pdfignore or -pdfcheck options :
- -pdfignore : dont check whether pdf exists and dont compare PDF and SLA last edit dates"
- -pdfcheck : check pdf, but dont re-create it in case required"

## Ensuring project sanity and safety ##

slacheck checks that the project has been correctly collected for output : 
it checks that all used images are stored into the local images/ folder

slacheck checks that the fonts are either embeded or subset
An option also exists also to use vectorized versions of the PDFs

## Searching text in whole book

* `-find "un texte"` searches string in textes of all chapters
- `-xmlfind "CNAME='mystyle'" searches string in the whole XML of all chapters (technical uses only)

## Other options

Try `-?` option for each tool so as to see main options. Mainly makbook example  (to be split in 2 files : makbook and project.config)

## could be done

Next step :
* Create separated config files for the list of files included in the project so as to release a generic makebook script (easy !)
 
Other usefull features :
* import or overwrite some specific style in all parts of the project
* use one of the document as the `masterdocument` and use it for smart synchronization for
   * masterdocuments 
   * styles (optionnaly state which styles should NOT be synced)
* optionnaly state that some attribut should remain unchanged when using -set option

Other not so usefull features :
* smart merge of SLAs (manage styles, masterpages and other conflicts) (usefull since merge of SLA is one of scribus Most Annoying Bug, but complex and not so usefull with this project manager)


## Rules when proposing a script or push request for this repo
* name of the script should be self-understandable and should give hints as what the script does
* you should provide a detailed description of the intent, required conditions and action of the script, as comments at the script's begining
* same for the push requests
* scripts should provide help on how to use them (-h option)
